# Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. 
The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way 
to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on
the songs in their app.They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play 
analysis. 

## Project Description
To complete the project:
* Define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus ( what songs the users are listening to)
* Write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

## Data sets:
(1). The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
* eg: song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
*     song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
* eg: {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

(2). The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.
* eg: log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
*     log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

## Softwares:
* Postgres
* Python ( Jupyter notebook)
